[WIP] Filterx docs (#69)
axoflow/axosyslog-core-docs: content/filterx/_index.md

The result of filterx statements is always a boolean value, either *true* or *false*:

- True values are: Complex values, non-empty strings, and non-zero numbers.
- False values are:
    - empty strings,
    - the `false` value,
    - the `0` value,
    - statements that result in an error (for example, if a comparison cannot be evaluated because of type error, or a field of a variable referenced in the statement is doesn't exist or is unset).

You can define a filterx statement like this:

```shell
filterx <identifier> {
    <filterx-statement-1>;
    <filterx-statement-2>;
    ...
};
```

Then use it in a log path:

```shell
log {
    source(s1);
    filterx(<identifier>);
    destination(d1);
};
```

You can also define it inline. For details, see {{% xref "/chapter-configuration-file/inline-objects/_index.md" %}}.

For example, the following filterx statement selects the messages that contain the word `deny` and come from the host `example`.

```shell
filterx demo_filterx {
    ${HOST} == "example";
    ${MESSAGE} =~ "deny";
};
log {
    source(s1);
    filter(demo_filterx);
    destination(d1);
};
```

> The following example does the same, but defines the filterx block inline.

Reviewer: in which case the identifier can be omitted

```shell
log {
    source(s1);
    filterx demo_filterx {
        ${HOST} == "example";
        ${MESSAGE} =~ "deny";
    };
    destination(d1);
};
```

You can use filterx blocks together with other blocks in a log path, for example, use a parser before/after the filterx block if needed.

<!-- FIXME what is mutable/immutable writable/read-only > devs to write a draft  -->

## Filterx statements

A filterx block contains one or more filterx statements. The order of the statements is important, as they are sequentially processed.  If any of the statements is false (or results in an error), {{< product >}} drops the message from that log path.

Filterx statements can be one of the following:

- A comparison, for example, `$HOST == "my-host";`. This statement is true only for messages where the `$HOST` field is `my-host`. Such simple comparison statements can be the equivalents of [traditional filter functions]({{< relref "/chapter-routing-filters/filters/reference-filters/_index.md" >}}).

> - A value assignment for a [name-value pair or a local variable](#variable-scope), for example, `$my-field = "bar";`. The left-side variable automatically gets the type of the right-hand expression.

Reviewer: does something like `a = false;` evaluate to false and thus exit?

Reviewer 2: This was the case, but fixed by assignment being excluded from the "falsy" logic.

- A conditional statement ( `if (expr) { ... } else { ... };`) that allows you evaluate complex decision trees.
- A declaration of a [pipeline variable](#variable-scope), for example, `declare my-pipeline-variable = "something";`.

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}

> - The `true;` and `false;` strings are also valid statements. They can be useful in complex conditional (if/elif/else) statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `true;` and `false;` literals are also valid as statements. They can be useful in complex conditional (if/elif/else) statements.
```

I wouldn't call these statements/snippets strings, it's confusing.

  ${HOST} = "second-hostname"; # The value of $MESSAGE is still first-hostname
};
```

The same is true for complex objects, like JSON, for example:

```shell
js = json_object({
    "key": "value",
    "second-key": "another-value"
});

${MESSAGE} = js;

js.third_key = "third-value-not-available-in-$MESSAGE";
```

## Data model and scope {#scoping}

Each filterx block can access data from the following elements.

- Macros and name-value pairs of the message being processed (for example, `$PROGRAM`). The names of macros and name-value pairs begin with the `$` character. If you define a new variable in a filterx block and its name begins with the `$` character, it's automatically added to the name-value pairs of the message.
- Local variables. These have a name that doesn't start with a `$` character, for example, `my-local-variable`. Local variables are available only in the filterx block they're defined. <!-- FIXME Are there other restrictions for the variable names? For example, cannot shadow type names? -->
- Pipeline variables. These are simliar to local variables, but must be declared before first use, for example, `declare my-pipeline-variable=5;`

>     Pipeline variables are available in the current and all subsequent filterx block.

Reviewer: I would try to make it clear that these are global in the sense that you can access them from multiple filterx blocks, but they are still attached to messages, and not preserved/synced between messages.

};
```

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}
When assigning values to name-value pairs, you cannot modify [hard macros]({{< relref "/chapter-manipulating-messages/customizing-message-format/macros-hard-vs-soft/_index.md" >}}).
{{% /alert %}}

You can use the traditional [template functions]({{< relref "/chapter-manipulating-messages/customizing-message-format/reference-template-functions/_index.md" >}}) of {{< product >}} to access and format name-value pairs. Note that you must enclose the template function expression between double-quotes, for example:

```shell
${MESSAGE} = "$(format-json --subkeys values.)";
```

### Delete values

To delete a value without deleting the object (for example, name-value pair), use the `null value`, for example:

```shell
${MY-NV-PAIR} = null;
```

To delete the name-value pair (or a key from an object), use the `unset` function:

```shell
unset(${MY-NV-PAIR});
unset(${MY-JSON}["key-to-delete"]);
```

### Concatenate strings

You can concatenate strings by adding them with the `+` operator. Note that if you want to have spaces between the added elements, you have to add them manually, like in Python, for example:

```shell

> ${MESSAGE} = ${HOST} + " first part of the message " + " second part of the message" + "\n")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
${MESSAGE} = ${HOST} + " first part of the message," + " second part of the message" + "\n")
```

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}
- The `true;` and `false;` strings are also valid statements. They can be useful in complex conditional (if/elif/else) statements.
- A name-value pair or a variable in itself is also a statement. For example, `$HOST;`. If the name-value pair or variable is empty or doesn't exist, the statement is false.
{{% /alert %}}

When you assign the value of a variable using another variable (for example, `$MESSAGE = "$HOST"`), {{< product >}} copies the current value of the `$HOST` variable. If a statement later changes the value of the `$HOST` field, the `$MESSAGE` field won't change. For example:

```shell
filterx {
  ${HOST} = "first-hostname";
  ${MESSAGE} = ${HOST}; # The value of $MESSAGE is first-hostname
  ${HOST} = "second-hostname"; # The value of $MESSAGE is still first-hostname
};
```

The same is true for complex objects, like JSON, for example:

```shell
js = json_object({
    "key": "value",
    "second-key": "another-value"
});

${MESSAGE} = js;

js.third_key = "third-value-not-available-in-$MESSAGE";
```

## Data model and scope {#scoping}

Each filterx block can access data from the following elements.

> - Macros and name-value pairs of the message being processed (for example, `$PROGRAM`). The names of macros and name-value pairs begin with the `$` character. If you define a new variable in a filterx block and its name begins with the `$` character, it's automatically added to the name-value pairs of the message.

Reviewer: if that's the case (I've seen examples of it in this doc), I would probably mention here that `$foo` can be written as `${foo}`

Reviewer 2: and it indeed can. the reason braces are permitted as the names can contain stuff like dots and other special characters.

${.SDATA.foo.bar} works for instance

- [`len`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#len" >}}): Returns the length of an object.
- [`lower`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#lower" >}}): Converts a string into lowercase characters.
- [`json, json_object`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#json" >}}): Convert a value into a JSON object.
- [`json_array`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#json-array" >}}): Convert a value into a JSON array.
- [`string`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#string" >}}): Convert a value into a string.
- [`strptime`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#strptime" >}}): Convert a value into datetime.
- [`unset`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#unset" >}}): Delete a name-value pair, or a field from an object.
- [`unset_empties`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#unset-empties" >}}): Delete empty fields from an object.
- [`upper`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#upper" >}}): Converts a string into uppercase characters.
- [`vars`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#vars" >}}): The variables defined in the filterx block.
- "bytes"
- "protobuf"
- "bool"
- "int"

> - "double"

Reviewer: we may handle these separately (not in this list), they are already mentioned for explicit typing

- `myint = 3;`
- `mydouble = 2.5;`
- `myboolean = true;`

If needed, you can explicitly specify the type of the variable:

```shell
<variable-name> = <variable-type>(<value-of-the-variable>);
```

For example:

```shell
filterx {
  ${MESSAGE} = string("Example string message");
};
```

You can also assign the value of other name-value pairs, for example:

```shell
filterx {
  ${MESSAGE} = ${HOST};
};
```

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}
When assigning values to name-value pairs, you cannot modify [hard macros]({{< relref "/chapter-manipulating-messages/customizing-message-format/macros-hard-vs-soft/_index.md" >}}).
{{% /alert %}}

You can use the traditional [template functions]({{< relref "/chapter-manipulating-messages/customizing-message-format/reference-template-functions/_index.md" >}}) of {{< product >}} to access and format name-value pairs. Note that you must enclose the template function expression between double-quotes, for example:

```shell
${MESSAGE} = "$(format-json --subkeys values.)";
```

### Delete values

To delete a value without deleting the object (for example, name-value pair), use the `null value`, for example:

```shell

> ${MY-NV-PAIR} = null;

Reviewer 3: Maybe a little bit easier to read if we write `${NV-PAIR-KEY}` here to lead the readers towards thinking about key-value.

```

To delete the name-value pair (or a key from an object), use the `unset` function:

```shell

> unset(${MY-NV-PAIR});

Reviewer 3: Is it possible to unset builtins like `MESSAGE`?

Reviewer 3: I asked for clarification from @alltilla , and the rule is hard macros cannot be unset. And nor be set.

We could reference the hard vs soft macros here: https://axoflow.com/docs/axosyslog-core/chapter-manipulating-messages/customizing-message-format/macros-hard-vs-soft/_print/?highlight=hard&highlight=macro

And add a warning/info about the assignment limitation too.

unset(${MY-JSON}["key-to-delete"]);
```

### Concatenate strings

You can concatenate strings by adding them with the `+` operator. Note that if you want to have spaces between the added elements, you have to add them manually, like in Python, for example:

```shell

> ${MESSAGE} = ${HOST} + " first part of the message," + " second part of the message" + "\n")

Reviewer 3: The terminating `)` is unbalanced. You can probably just delete it?

Filterx blocks consist of a list of filterx statements, the result of every statement is either *true* or *false*. If a message matches all filterx statements, it passes the filterx block to the next element of the log path, for example, the destination.

- True values are: Complex values, non-empty strings, and non-zero numbers.
- False values are:
    - empty strings,
    - the `false` value,
    - the `0` value,
    - statements that result in an error (for example, if a comparison cannot be evaluated because of type error, or a field of a variable referenced in the statement is doesn't exist or is unset).

## Define a filterx block

You can define a filterx statement like this:

```shell
block filterx() <identifier> {
    <filterx-statement-1>;
    <filterx-statement-2>;
    ...
};
```

Then use it in a log path:

```shell
log {
    source(s1);
    filterx(<identifier>);
    destination(d1);
};

> ```

Reviewer 4: I'm sorry, I messed up the syntax, we need a pair of parentheses, too after the identifier:
```
block filterx reusable_filterx_block() {
    <filterx-statement-1>;
    <filterx-statement-2>;
    ...
};
```

- [`parse_csv`]({{< relref "/filterx/filterx-parsing/csv/_index.md" >}}): Separates a comma-separated or similar string.
- [`parse_kv`]({{< relref "/filterx/filterx-parsing/key-value-parser/_index.md" >}}): Separates a string consisting of whitespace or comma-separated `key=value` pairs.
    <!-- - [`parse_xml`](FIXME): Parses an XML object into a JSON object. -->
- [`regexp_search`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#regexp-search" >}}): Searches a string using regular expressions.
- [`regexp_subst`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#regexp-subst" >}}): Rewrites a string using regular expressions.
- [`strptime`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#strptime" >}}): Converts a value into datetime.
- [`unset`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#unset" >}}): Deletes a name-value pair, or a field from an object.
- [`unset_empties`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#unset-empties" >}}): Deletes empty fields from an object.
- [`upper`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#upper" >}}): Converts a string into uppercase characters.
- [`vars`]({{< relref "/filterx/function-reference.md#vars" >}}): The variables defined in the filterx block.

> 

Reviewer 4: These are also available: `has_sdata()`, `is_sdata_from_enterprise()`, `get_sdata()`, `format_json()`, `update_metric()` and soon `parse_xml()`

    - use [value comparison in the filterx block]({{< relref "/filterx/filterx-comparing/_index.md" >}}) to select the appropriate messages. For example, to rewrite only messages of the NGINX application, you can:

        ```shell
        ${PROGRAM} == "nginx";
        # <your rewrite expression>
        ```

### Create an iptables parser

The following example shows you how to reimplement the {{% xref "/chapter-parsers/parser-iptables/_index.md" %}} in a filterx block. The following is a sample iptables log message (with line-breaks added for readability):

```shell
Dec 08 12:00:00 hostname.example kernel: custom-prefix:IN=eth0 OUT=
MAC=11:22:33:44:55:66:aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff:08:00 SRC=192.0.2.2 DST=192.168.0.1 LEN=40 TOS=0x00
PREC=0x00 TTL=232 ID=12345 PROTO=TCP SPT=54321 DPT=22 WINDOW=1023 RES=0x00 SYN URGP=0
```

This is a normal RFC3164-formatted log message which comes from the kernel (where iptables logging messages originate), and contains space-separated key-value pairs.

1. First, create some filter statements to select only iptables messages:

    ```shell

>     block filterx() parse_iptables {

Reviewer 4: `block filterx parse_iptables() {`
